.\" Copyright (c) 2024 Vít Labuda. All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the
.\" following conditions are met:
.\"  1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following
.\"     disclaimer.
.\"  2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the
.\"     following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"  3. Neither the name of the copyright holder nor the names of its contributors may be used to endorse or promote
.\"     products derived from this software without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES,
.\" INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE
.\" DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
.\" SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR
.\" SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY,
.\" WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE
.\" OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.

.TH tundra-nat64.conf 5 2024-07-22 tundra-nat64

.SH NAME
tundra-nat64.conf \- configuration file for
.BR tundra-nat64 (8)



.SH DESCRIPTION
The file \fItundra-nat64.conf\fP contains the configuration for
.BR tundra-nat64 (8) .
This manual page describes both the file's format and the available configuration options.
.PP

Each line of the configuration file shall be in the form \fIoption.key = option_value\fP. Whitespace at the beginning
and at the end of lines is ignored, just as whitespace around the '=' sign. In addition, empty lines and lines
beginning with either '#' or ';' are ignored. For boolean options, it is recommended to use \fIyes\fP and \fIno\fP as
values.
.PP

The available configuration options can be divided into the following categories, each of which is described in the
corresponding section below: \fBprogram options\fP, \fBI/O options\fP, \fBrouter options\fP, \fBaddressing options\fP,
and \fBtranslator options\fP.
.PP

An example configuration file, \fItundra-nat64.example.conf\fP, is available in the project's Git repository, and if
you installed this program from your distribution's repositories, you should also have it available somewhere locally.



.SH "PROGRAM OPTIONS"

.TP
.B program.translator_threads
The number of threads used to translate packets.
If left empty, the number of CPUs (cores, SMT threads, ...) your device has is used.

.TP
.B program.privilege_drop_user
.TQ
.B program.privilege_drop_group
The name of a user/group to which the program will drop its privileges after it initializes.
If the value is left empty, no privilege drop is performed.



.SH "I/O OPTIONS"

.TP
.B io.mode
Specifies the means by which the translator will receive and send packets. There are two I/O modes available:
\fIinherited-fds\fP and \fItun\fP. Both I/O modes are described in detail in the subsections below, along with the
required configuration options corresponding to them.


.SS "The 'inherited-fds' I/O mode"
In the \fIinherited-fds\fP I/O mode, Tundra inherits file descriptors from the program that executed it - their numbers
are passed to Tundra using the '-f' or '--io-inherited-fds' command-line option - see
.BR tundra-nat64 (8) .
.PP
Each translator thread is assigned a pair of file descriptors that it will then use to receive (\fITHREAD*_IN\fP) and
send (\fITHREAD*_OUT\fP) packets (therefore, you must pass as many file descriptor pairs to the program as there are
translator threads). Keep in mind that the program is primarily designed to work with TUN interface's file descriptors;
therefore, the inherited ones must behave similarly, namely:
.br
 - each read() call on \fITHREAD*_IN\fP file descriptor must return a single whole packet
.br
 - each write() call on \fITHREAD*_OUT\fP file descriptor must accept a single whole packet up to MTU bytes in size
.PP
This means that only file descriptors which preserve message boundaries and have sufficient read/write buffers may be
used. Specifically, datagram sockets created using \fIsocketpair(AF_UNIX, SOCK_DGRAM)\fP whose buffers' sizes have been
properly adjusted using \fIsetsockopt(SO_RCVBUF)\fP and \fIsetsockopt(SO_SNDBUF)\fP meet these requirements (whereas,
for example, pipes do not, since they do not preserve message boundaries). Only blocking file descriptors may be used.
.PP
This I/O mode does not have any corresponding configuration file options.


.SS "The 'tun' I/O mode"
In the \fItun\fP I/O mode, Tundra initializes a TUN network interface according to the options documented below, and
uses it to receive and send packets.

.TP
.B io.tun.device_path
The path of the character device through which is the TUN/TAP driver exposed.
If the value is left empty, the well-known path \fI/dev/net/tun\fP is used.

.TP
.B io.tun.interface_name
The name of the TUN network interface Tundra will use to receive and send packets.
The value must not be left empty.

.TP
.B io.tun.owner_user
.TQ
.B io.tun.owner_group
The name of a user/group who will own persistent TUN interfaces created by Tundra.
If the value is left empty, TUN interfaces created by Tundra will not have their ownership set.

.TP
.B io.tun.multi_queue
Specifies whether the TUN interface created by Tundra will have multiple packet queues.
.IP
In single-queue mode, Tundra acquires a single file descriptor to the TUN interface, which is then shared by all
translator threads. Since this naturally causes a load-balancing behaviour, this mode is much faster in the vast
majority of environments; therefore, this option is set to \fIno\fP by default.
.IP
In multi-queue mode, each translator thread is given its own file descriptor to the TUN interface (which is created
with the \fIIFF_MULTI_QUEUE\fP flag set). As mentioned before, this mode is usually much slower, as the kernel puts
packets belonging to a single flow/connection to the same queue and therefore does not do load-balancing. In addition,
multi-queue TUN interfaces tend to have a far larger memory footprint - beware of this when deploying this program on
very-low-memory devices, such as cheap SOHO routers.



.SH "ROUTER OPTIONS"

.TP
.B router.ipv4
.TQ
.B router.ipv6
.TQ
.B router.generated_packet_ttl
In certain cases, the translator needs to behave as a router and therefore needs to be able to send ICMP messages. The
\fIrouter.ipv4\fP and \fIrouter.ipv6\fP options specify the source IP addresses, and the
\fIrouter.generated_packet_ttl\fP option specifies the TTL/hop limit of ICMP packets originating from the translator.



.SH "ADDRESSING OPTIONS"

.TP
.B addressing.mode
Specifies how the program will translate IPv6 addresses into IPv4 ones and vice versa. The following addressing
modes are supported: \fInat64\fP, \fIclat\fP, \fIsiit\fP and \fIexternal\fP. All the addressing modes are described in
detail in the subsections below, along with the required configuration options corresponding to them.


.SS "The 'nat64' addressing mode"

.TP
.B addressing.nat64_clat.ipv4
.TQ
.B addressing.nat64_clat.ipv6
.TQ
.B addressing.nat64_clat_siit.prefix
.TQ
.B addressing.nat64_clat_siit.allow_translation_of_private_ips
In the \fInat64\fP addressing mode, IP addresses in packets are (statelessly) translated the following way:
.br
.ad l
.hy 0
 * IPv6-Packet(src=\fIaddressing.nat64_clat.ipv6\fP, dst=\fIaddressing.nat64_clat_siit.prefix\fP + any-valid-IPv4-address) --> IPv4-Packet(src=\fIaddressing.nat64_clat.ipv4\fP, dst=the-valid-IPv4-address)
.hy 1
.ad n
.br
.ad l
.hy 0
 * IPv4-Packet(src=any-valid-IPv4-address, dst=\fIaddressing.nat64_clat.ipv4\fP) --> IPv6-Packet(src=\fIaddressing.nat64_clat_siit.prefix\fP + the-valid-IPv4-address, dst=\fIaddressing.nat64_clat.ipv6\fP)
.hy 1
.ad n
.IP

The length of \fIaddressing.nat64_clat_siit.prefix\fP is fixed to be 96 bits (/96), which is probably the only prefix
length used in production deployments. The length shall not be specified in the option's value. Tundra does not
support other prefix lengths. If you leave the value of this option empty, the program will try to auto-discover it
using the DNS name "ipv4only.arpa." (see RFC 7050).
.IP

RFC 6052 states that the well-known prefix (64:ff9b::/96) must not be used to represent non-global IPv4 addresses.
For this reason, Tundra offers the \fIaddressing.nat64_clat_siit.allow_translation_of_private_ips\fP option which
should be set to \fIno\fP if you are using the well-known prefix (which will cause all packets containing problematic
addresses to be silently dropped). Keep in mind that the option only affects IPv4 addresses embedded into the prefix -
\fIaddressing.nat64_clat.ipv4\fP and \fIrouter.ipv4\fP can be private even if the option is set to \fIno\fP.
.IP

Tundra itself cannot act as a NAT64 translator for more than one host, as it lacks an internal dynamic address
pool from which it would assign addresses to hosts needing its service - it only uses the single configurable IPv4 and
IPv6 address. However, you can use Tundra in cooperation with Linux's in-kernel NAT66, which can masquerade a whole
network requesting NAT64 service behind \fIaddressing.nat64_clat.ipv6\fP.


.SS "The 'clat' addressing mode"

.TP
.B addressing.nat64_clat.ipv4
.TQ
.B addressing.nat64_clat.ipv6
.TQ
.B addressing.nat64_clat_siit.prefix
.TQ
.B addressing.nat64_clat_siit.allow_translation_of_private_ips
In the \fIclat\fP addressing mode, IP addresses in packets are (statelessly) translated the following way:
.br
.ad l
.hy 0
 * IPv4-Packet(src=\fIaddressing.nat64_clat.ipv4\fP, dst=any-valid-IPv4-address) --> IPv6-Packet(src=\fIaddressing.nat64_clat.ipv6\fP, dst=\fIaddressing.nat64_clat_siit.prefix\fP + the-valid-IPv4-address)
.hy 1
.ad n
.br
.ad l
.hy 0
 * IPv6-Packet(src=\fIaddressing.nat64_clat_siit.prefix\fP + any-valid-IPv4-address, dst=\fIaddressing.nat64_clat.ipv6\fP) --> IPv4-Packet(src=the-valid-IPv4-address, dst=\fIaddressing.nat64_clat.ipv4\fP)
.hy 1
.ad n
.IP

The length of \fIaddressing.nat64_clat_siit.prefix\fP is fixed to be 96 bits (/96), which is probably the only prefix
length used in production deployments. The length shall not be specified in the option's value. Tundra does not
support other prefix lengths. If you leave the value of this option empty, the program will try to auto-discover it
using the DNS name "ipv4only.arpa." (see RFC 7050).
.IP

RFC 6052 states that the well-known prefix (64:ff9b::/96) must not be used to represent non-global IPv4 addresses.
For this reason, Tundra offers the \fIaddressing.nat64_clat_siit.allow_translation_of_private_ips\fP option which
should be set to \fIno\fP if you are using the well-known prefix (which will cause all packets containing problematic
addresses to be silently dropped). Keep in mind that the option only affects IPv4 addresses embedded into the prefix -
\fIaddressing.nat64_clat.ipv4\fP and \fIrouter.ipv4\fP can be private even if the option is set to \fIno\fP.
.IP

Tundra itself cannot act as a CLAT translator for more than one host, as it lacks an internal dynamic address
pool from which it would assign addresses to hosts needing its service - it only uses the single configurable IPv4 and
IPv6 address. However, you can use Tundra in cooperation with Linux's in-kernel NAT44, which can masquerade a whole
network requesting CLAT service behind \fIaddressing.nat64_clat.ipv4\fP.


.SS "The 'siit' addressing mode"

.TP
.B addressing.nat64_clat_siit.prefix
.TQ
.B addressing.nat64_clat_siit.allow_translation_of_private_ips
In the \fIsiit\fP addressing mode, IP addresses in packets are (statelessly) translated the following way:
.br
.ad l
.hy 0
 * IPv4-Packet(src=any-valid-IPv4-address, dst=any-valid-IPv4-address) --> IPv6-Packet(src=\fIaddressing.nat64_clat_siit.prefix\fP + the-valid-IPv4-address, dst=\fIaddressing.nat64_clat_siit.prefix\fP + the-valid-IPv4-address)
.hy 1
.ad n
.br
.ad l
.hy 0
 * IPv6-Packet(src=\fIaddressing.nat64_clat_siit.prefix\fP + any-valid-IPv4-address, dst=\fIaddressing.nat64_clat_siit.prefix\fP + any-valid-IPv4-address) --> IPv4-Packet(src=the-valid-IPv4-address, dst=the-valid-IPv4-address)
.hy 1
.ad n
.IP

The length of \fIaddressing.nat64_clat_siit.prefix\fP is fixed to be 96 bits (/96), which is probably the only prefix
length used in production deployments. The length shall not be specified in the option's value. Tundra does not
support other prefix lengths. If you leave the value of this option empty, the program will try to auto-discover it
using the DNS name "ipv4only.arpa." (see RFC 7050).
.IP

RFC 6052 states that the well-known prefix (64:ff9b::/96) must not be used to represent non-global IPv4 addresses.
For this reason, Tundra offers the \fIaddressing.nat64_clat_siit.allow_translation_of_private_ips\fP option which
should be set to \fIno\fP if you are using the well-known prefix (which will cause all packets containing problematic
addresses to be silently dropped). Keep in mind that the option only affects IPv4 addresses embedded into the prefix -
\fIrouter.ipv4\fP can be private even if the option is set to \fIno\fP.


.SS "The 'external' addressing mode"
In the \fIexternal\fP addressing mode, Tundra delegates address translation to another program-server. In this mode,
Tundra will translate packets from IPv4 to IPv6 and vice versa as per the rules of SIIT while querying an external
address translator for IP addresses to be put in the translated packets. The specification of the protocol which Tundra
uses to communicate with the external translator can be found in the project's Git repository.

.TP
.B addressing.external.transport
Specifies the communication channel the program will use to query the external address translator. The following
transport modes are supported: \fIinherited-fds\fP, \fIunix\fP and \fItcp\fP. All the transport modes are described in
detail below, along with the required configuration options corresponding to them.

.TP
.B addressing.external.cache_size.main_addresses
.TQ
.B addressing.external.cache_size.icmp_error_addresses
Since querying an external program, possibly even over a network, is very likely to be far slower than translating
the addresses internally, Tundra offers the ability to cache received translated addresses for a short time. This has
the benefit of not only making Tundra significantly faster, but also reducing the load of the "backend".
.IP
These two options control the maximum number of cached addresses per translation thread per "direction" (4to6 vs. 6to4).
If they are set to zero, the caching will be turned off, and the "backend" will be queried for every translated packet.
\fIaddressing.external.cache_size.main_addresses\fP controls the caching of addresses within "main" packets (i.e. the
packets which carry data), whereas \fIaddressing.external.cache_size.icmp_error_addresses\fP controls the caching of
addresses within ICMP error packets, i.e. packets "in error" carried inside ICMP error messages' bodies.

.TP
.B "The 'inherited-fds' transport mode"
In the \fIinherited-fds\fP transport mode, Tundra communicates with an external address translator using pairs of file
descriptors (each translator thread uses a single pair) inherited from a program that executed it - their numbers are
passed to it using the '-F' or '--addressing-external-inherited-fds' command-line option - see
.BR tundra-nat64 (8) .
.IP
As documented in the protocol specification, the file descriptors should be referring to a "stream" communication
channel, for example a \fIpipe()\fP or a \fISOCK_STREAM\fP socket. Only blocking file descriptors may be used.
.IP
This transport mode does not have any corresponding configuration file options.

.TP
.B "The 'unix' transport mode"
.TQ
.B "  addressing.external.unix.path"
.TQ
.B "  addressing.external.unix_tcp.timeout_milliseconds"
In the \fIunix\fP transport mode, Tundra connects to an external address translator's Unix \fISOCK_STREAM\fP server
socket, whose path is specified through the \fIaddressing.external.unix.path\fP option. Keep in mind that connections
to the socket are established after the program initializes, i.e. after it changes its working directory to '/' and
drops its privileges, if it is configured to do so.

.TP
.B "The 'tcp' transport mode"
.TQ
.B "  addressing.external.tcp.host"
.TQ
.B "  addressing.external.tcp.port"
.TQ
.B "  addressing.external.unix_tcp.timeout_milliseconds"
In the \fItcp\fP transport mode, Tundra connects to an external address translator's TCP server socket. Even though
supplying a hostname instead of an IPv4/IPv6 address through the \fIaddressing.external.tcp.host\fP option is fully
supported, it is not recommended, as it can lead to crashes during program initialization due to malfunctioning DNS.



.SH "TRANSLATOR OPTIONS"

.TP
.B translator.ipv4.outbound_mtu
.TQ
.B translator.ipv6.outbound_mtu
These options specify the maximum size (in bytes) a single IPv4/IPv6 packet can have when it is sent out by the
translator. For IPv4, the lowest MTU you can specify is 96 bytes; for IPv6, it is 1280 bytes.

.TP
.B translator.6to4.copy_dscp_and_ecn
.TQ
.B translator.4to6.copy_dscp_and_ecn
IPv4 packets contain the ToS field and IPv6 packets contain the Traffic Class field, both of which nowadays normally
consist of the DSCP (Differentiated Services Code Point) and ECN (Explicit Congestion Notification) fields. However,
in some legacy networks, the IPv4 ToS field might be used with old semantics which are not compatible with IPv6. To
prevent problems in such networks, Tundra can be instructed not to copy the fields over and zero them out instead
using these options. In the vast majority of cases, however, this is not a problem, and so you can leave these options
enabled.



.SH NOTES
Tundra can be instructed to stop reading the configuration file (before the end of the file) using a line containing
only the string \fB!STOP\fP (case-sensitive). If such line is encountered, the program stops reading the configuration
file immediately and the file is closed. This can be useful for example when the program's configuration is read from
a named pipe, standard input etc.



.SH "GIT REPOSITORY"
https://github.com/vitlabuda/tundra-nat64



.SH COPYRIGHT
SPDX-License-Identifier: BSD-3-Clause
.PP
Copyright (c) 2024 Vít Labuda. All rights reserved.
.br
    https://vitlabuda.cz/
.br
    vit <_at_> vitlabuda <_dot_> cz



.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR tundra-nat64 (8)
