.\" Copyright (c) 2024 Vít Labuda. All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the
.\" following conditions are met:
.\"  1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following
.\"     disclaimer.
.\"  2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the
.\"     following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"  3. Neither the name of the copyright holder nor the names of its contributors may be used to endorse or promote
.\"     products derived from this software without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES,
.\" INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE
.\" DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
.\" SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR
.\" SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY,
.\" WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE
.\" OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.

.TH tundra-nat64 8 2024-07-22 tundra-nat64

.SH NAME
tundra-nat64 \- a stateless user-space NAT64/CLAT/SIIT translator for Linux



.SH SYNOPSIS
.SY tundra-nat64
.OP OPTIONS
.OP "MODE OF OPERATION"
.YS



.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBTundra-NAT64\fP is an open-source IPv6-to-IPv4 & IPv4-to-IPv6 translator for Linux which operates entirely in
user-space, can run in multiple threads and uses either the TUN driver or inherited file descriptors to receive and
send packets. It translates packets according to the rules of \fISIIT\fP (RFC 7915), while offering the following
address translation modes:
.PP

.IP \[bu] 4
\fBStateless NAT64\fP - In this mode, Tundra is making it possible for a single host, or, in cooperation with Linux's
in-kernel NAT66 translator, for any number of hosts on an IPv6-only network to access IPv4-only hosts.

.IP \[bu]
\fBStateless CLAT\fP - In this mode, Tundra is making it possible for programs using IPv4-only sockets (AF_INET)
to access IPv4-only hosts when running on a computer connected to an IPv6-only network with a NAT64 service. In
addition, when running on a router which is connected to the outside world over an IPv6-only network with a NAT64
service, Tundra may be used to create a dual-stack internal network in cooperation with Linux's in-kernel NAT44
translator.

.IP \[bu]
\fBSIIT\fP - In this mode, Tundra is translating IPv6 packets whose addresses are composed of an IPv4 address wrapped
inside a translation prefix into IPv4 packets with the same IPv4 addresses (extracted from the aforementioned prefix),
and vice versa.

.IP \[bu]
\fBExternal\fP - In this mode, Tundra delegates address translation to another program-server, with which it
communicates via inherited file descriptors, Unix stream sockets or TCP. Tundra will translate packets from IPv4 to
IPv6 and vice versa as per the rules of SIIT while querying an external address translator for IP addresses to be put
in the translated packets.

.PP
More information about the address translation modes, including how to configure them, can be found in
.BR tundra-nat64.conf (5) .



.SH OPTIONS

.TP 4
.B "-h, --help"
Prints help and exits.

.TP
.B "-v, --version"
Prints version information and exits.

.TP
.B "-l, --license"
Prints license and exits.

.TP
.B "-c, --config-file=CONFIG_FILE_PATH"
Specifies the file from which the program's configuration will be loaded. To load configuration from the standard
input, specify '-' as the path. See
.BR tundra-nat64.conf (5)
for more information.

.TP
.B "-f, --io-inherited-fds=THREAD1_IN,THREAD1_OUT[;THREAD2_IN,THREAD2_OUT]..."
Specifies the file descriptors to be used in the 'inherited-fds' I/O mode. Ignored otherwise.

.TP
.B "-F, --addressing-external-inherited-fds=THREAD1_IN,THREAD1_OUT[;THREAD2_IN,THREAD2_OUT]..."
Specifies the file descriptors to be used for the 'inherited-fds' transport of the 'external' addressing mode. Ignored
otherwise.



.SH "MODE OF OPERATION"

.TP 4
.B translate
The program will act as a stateless NAT64/CLAT/SIIT translator.
This is the default mode of operation.

.TP
.B mktun
Creates a persistent TUN device according to the configuration file, then exits.
Applicable only in the 'tun' I/O mode.

.TP
.B rmtun
Destroys a previously created persistent TUN device according to the configuration file, then exits.
Applicable only in the 'tun' I/O mode.

.TP
.B "validate-config"
Tries to configure the program and prints an informational message if it succeeds, then exits.



.SH "GIT REPOSITORY"
https://github.com/vitlabuda/tundra-nat64



.SH COPYRIGHT
SPDX-License-Identifier: BSD-3-Clause
.PP
Copyright (c) 2024 Vít Labuda. All rights reserved.
.br
    https://vitlabuda.cz/
.br
    vit <_at_> vitlabuda <_dot_> cz



.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR tundra-nat64.conf (5)
